Historical Record File Wrapping for Block Stream Cutover (#1427)
hiero-ledger/hiero-improvement-proposals: HIP/hip-1427.md

| Offset | Length | Field |
|:---:|:---:|---|
| 0 | 8 bytes | Block number of the last wrapped record block (big-endian `long`) |
| 8 | 48 bytes | SHA-384 root hash of the last wrapped record block |
| 56 | 8 bytes | All-blocks streaming Merkle tree leaf count (big-endian `long`) |
| 64 | 4 bytes | Number of intermediate hash entries in the streaming Merkle tree (big-endian `int`) |
| 68 | 48 × N bytes | Intermediate hash list of the streaming Merkle tree (N entries of 48 bytes each) |

The consensus node SHALL read this file at first startup after an upgrade (prior to cutover) and use its contents as follows:

- The block number is incremented by one to produce the block number of the next wrapped record block.
- The 48-byte root hash becomes the `previous_block_root_hash` field in the `BlockFooter` of the next wrapped record block.
- The leaf count and hash list are used to initialize the streaming Merkle tree so that the future first live block's
   `root_hash_of_all_block_hashes_tree` correctly incorporates all historical block root hashes.

The maximum possible size of the jumpstart file is `68 + 48 × ceil(log₂(N))` bytes, where `N` is the total number of

> historical blocks. For one billion historical blocks this is approximately `68 + 48 × 30 = 1,508 bytes`.

Reviewer: 1. We will have roughly 100 million WRBs, not 1 billion.
2. The actual number of hashes is _up to_ log₂(N), but might be as little as 0. It all depends on the exact number of leaves and how many "orphan" inner nodes there are in the tree.

```suggestion
historical blocks. For one hundred million historical blocks this is approximately `68 + 48 × 27 = 1,364 bytes`.
```

---

### Block Node Integration

Tier-1 block nodes SHALL ingest the wrapped record blocks using the block node's historic file persistence plugin.
The wrapped record blocks are compatible with the block node's standard block ingestion path. Block nodes SHALL verify
each wrapped record block as it is ingested; if any block fails hash chain verification it SHALL be rejected and the
ingestion operator SHALL be notified.

The wrapped record blocks directory structure produced by `blocks wrap` is compatible with the block node's historic
plugin directory layout. Block nodes MAY ingest blocks directly from the zip archives without unpacking them.

---

## Backwards Compatibility

This HIP defines a process that runs entirely before and independently of the live network. It does not change any
on-chain transaction processing, any existing API, or any currently-running network component. All changes are
additive: a new binary artifact (the jumpstart file) and a new set of block stream files are produced.

Historical record files remain available in their original format and location in cloud storage after the conversion;

> the wrapping process is read-only with respect to the source bucket.

Reviewer: I don't know if we guarantee this indefinitely.
We need to archive this data to cold storage at some point inorder to realize cost savings.

data. This provides a natural barrier against unsanctioned bulk downloads but is not a substitute for verifying the
integrity of downloaded data against the Mirror Node's known record file hashes.

## How to Teach This

### For consensus node engineers

The jumpstart file is the handshake between the historical wrapping process and the live block producer. The consensus
node needs three things from history: the last block number, the hash of the last block, and the Merkle tree state that
accumulates all block hashes. These three items are pre-computed by the wrapping process for the exact same reason the
`BlockFooter` exists in the live block stream — they cannot be computed from data that hasn't been produced yet. Load
the file at startup, initialize the three state variables from it, and the first live block will be correctly linked to
the full historical chain.

### For block node engineers

Wrapped historical blocks are ordinary block stream blocks whose `BlockProof` uses the `SignedRecordFileProof` variant.
The block node's verification path should already handle this variant (as defined in HIP-1424). Ingestion of wrapped

> record blocks via the historic file plugin follows the same path as any other block ingestion.

Reviewer: The folder/path structure is probably the most important difference.
Also, we need to ensure the compression and structure are compatible.

Alternatively, we could just deliver all of the history via the same pathway used for live blocks. The simplest mechanism might be to use the `publish` API via localhost, which would avoid needing to add any extra support infrastructure.

single high-memory machine with fast GCS access; Phases 2 and 4 can be parallelized across machines by partitioning
the date range.

## Reference Implementation

The reference implementation is the `blocks wrap` command in the `hiero-block-node/tools-and-tests/tools` subproject of
the `hiero-block-node` repository, built on the Java `picocli` framework with PBJ protobuf serialization. The tool is
runnable as a shadow JAR:

```bash
./gradlew :tools:shadowJar
java -jar tools-and-tests/tools/build/libs/tools-<version>-all.jar blocks wrap --help
```

The reference implementation SHALL be considered complete when the following have been delivered:

- The `blocks wrap` command produces wrapped record blocks that pass all `blocks validate-wrapped` checks across the
   full Hedera mainnet history from genesis to the block stream cutover block.
- The `jumpstart.bin` produced from a full mainnet conversion is loaded and used by the consensus node in integration
   tests to produce a correctly-linked first live block.
- The wrapped record blocks are accepted and stored by the Tier-1 block node historic file plugin in integration tests.

> - The wrapped record blocks are independently verifiable by at least one third-party implementation.

Reviewer: I think we need to add "mainnet and testnet cutover are complete" here.
Otherwise we might think the conversion is done when we still have a full month of live records to convert.

## Open Issues

1. **State root hash for historical blocks**: As noted in Rejected Ideas, historical wrapped blocks set
   `start_of_block_state_root_hash` to zero. If a future need arises for state proofs referencing historical blocks, a
   mechanism to compute and embed accurate state root hashes for historical blocks would be required. This is out of
   scope for this HIP.

2. **Wrapped record block storage and CDN distribution**: The operational details of where the wrapped blocks are
   hosted for block node operators to download (e.g., a public GCP bucket, a CDN, or a peer-to-peer distribution
   mechanism) are not specified here. This will be determined as part of the block node launch operations plan.

3. **State Changes in wrapped record block structure**: The Wrapped record block structure currently omits State-Changes
   In most cases this is correct but likely block 0 and possible amendment captures map require state changes for visibility.
   Need to confirm this.

4. **wrappedBlocks/<range>.zip format**: Need to confirm what format the range value takes.

> ## References

Reviewer: We should probably include a reference to the cutover process, since that describes how the jumpstart file is used and also covers many of the process changes.

The `blocks validate` command detects such tampering before any artifact is deployed.

### Supply Verification

The 50 billion HBAR supply check provides an additional layer of integrity assurance: it confirms that the wrapped
record blocks faithfully represent the transfer lists and state changes recorded in the original record files, not an
altered view. Any block that deletes or fabricates HBAR balances would be detected at the next balance checkpoint.

### Jumpstart File Distribution

The jumpstart file is a critical input to the first live block. Its 48-byte hash and Merkle tree state MUST be
distributed to all consensus nodes with the same integrity guarantees as the node software itself (e.g., via signed
release packages). A tampered jumpstart file would cause consensus nodes to diverge on the Historical block hash Merkle
tree root in the first live block, preventing threshold signature aggregation.

### Requester-Pays Access Control

The record stream bucket uses requester-pays access. Only parties with configured GCP access can download the source
data. This provides a natural barrier against unsanctioned bulk downloads but is not a substitute for verifying the

> integrity of downloaded data against the Mirror Node's known record file hashes.

Reviewer: Note from meeting, we should remove this paragraph.

| `streamingMerkleTree.bin` | Checkpoint of the streaming Merkle tree state for resume |
| `wrap-commit.bin` | The durable watermark file, tracks the highest block number successfully written and enables
   crash recovery |
| `jumpstart.bin` | The jumpstart contents for the consensus node (see §4.4) |

#### 4.4 Jumpstart contents format

The jumpstart contents are serialized to `jumpstart.bin`, a binary file written frequently during the live process and
updated incrementally on graceful shutdown via a JVM shutdown hook. The binary layout is:

![jumpstart.bin Binary Format](../assets/hip-1427/jumpstart-format.svg)

| Offset | Length | Field |
|:---:|:---:|---|
| 0 | 8 bytes | Block number of the last wrapped record block (big-endian `long`) |
| 8 | 48 bytes | SHA-384 root hash of the last wrapped record block |
| 56 | 8 bytes | All-blocks streaming Merkle tree leaf count (big-endian `long`) |
| 64 | 4 bytes | Number of intermediate hash entries in the streaming Merkle tree (big-endian `int`) |
| 68 | 48 × N bytes | Intermediate hash list of the streaming Merkle tree (N entries of 48 bytes each) |

> The consensus node SHALL read `jumpstart.bin` at first startup after an upgrade (prior to cutover) and use the jumpstart contents as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The consensus node SHALL read jumpstart configuration at first startup after an upgrade (prior to cutover) and use the jumpstart contents as follows:
```

before any party relies on the wrapped record blocks for production use.

---

### Node Integration Coordination
#### Consensus Node Integration

The jumpstart contents are signed and agreed upon by network operators before distribution and are deployed to
consensus nodes via a `FileUpdate` transaction to file `0.121.0` along with values for the following configurations.

```
blockStream.jumpstart.blockNum
blockStream.jumpstart.previousWrappedRecordBlockHash
blockStream.jumpstart.streamingHasherLeafCount
blockStream.jumpstart.streamingHasherHashCount
blockStream.jumpstart.streamingHasherSubtreeHashes
```

This on-chain distribution mechanism means the
contents carry the same governance weight as any other network file update.

The consensus node SHALL implement a jumpstart contents loader that:

1. Starting two full releases before cutover, stores partial WRB hash data for every record file produced.
2. One release before cutover, reads `jumpstart.bin` from a configurable path at startup.
3. Verifies that the SHA-384 root hash in the jumpstart contents matches the hash computed from the stored WRB

>    partial hash data at the indicated block number.

Reviewer: (correction)
This step has to happen _after_ step (5), as we don't have the root hash to compare with until we calculate it using the jumpstart data.

8. Continues WRB hashing with complete information and maintains both the previous block root hash and the all-blocks
   hash tree from that block forward.

The consensus node SHALL validate the jumpstart contents' integrity on load (e.g., verify that the byte length matches
the encoded hash count field). If the contents are malformed or the hash verification in step 3 fails, the consensus
node SHALL log a detailed error and abort the jumpstart initialization — but SHALL NOT halt startup entirely. In that
case the node will continue to operate without the historical WRB hash chain linked, and the mismatch MUST be
investigated and resolved before the cutover upgrade is applied. Operators are expected to retry with corrected
jumpstart contents once the source of the mismatch is identified.

> **Note on hash mismatch retry**: A mismatch most commonly indicates that the jumpstart contents were generated
> from a different version of the record file corpus than the partial WRB hash data stored by this node. The operator
> should verify that the distributed `jumpstart.bin` corresponds to the same conversion run as the node's stored

> > hashes, then re-deploy the correct contents via a `FileUpdate`.

Reviewer: I think we should leave this paragraph out.

1. The jumpstart content is in network state, so it's the same on all nodes.
1. A file update modifies all nodes, not just one; and it's a council-signed update of file 121; not something an operator can modify.

The hash data that results from applying the jumpstart data is also stored in state.
If only one node has a different value somehow; the node will ISS and resolution will be to reconnect.

If the whole network gets the wrong value, then we will fallback as indicated in the paragraphs above.

---

#### Block Node Integration

Tier-1 block nodes SHOULD ingest the wrapped record blocks using the block node's backfill plugin in order to
serve complete historical data to clients. However, persisting the full historical corpus from the stream starting
point is a desired property, not a hard requirement: it is unlikely that every Tier-1 operator — particularly

> Linux Foundation Hiero (LFH) member-run nodes — will retain the complete history indefinitely, and this cannot

Reviewer: I have no idea where this interpretation of LFH came from; guessing it's an LLM hallucination.
```suggestion
Local Full History (LFH) member-run nodes — will retain the complete history indefinitely, and this cannot
```
